So now, let's talk about the NIfTI file format.
The NIfTI file format has been originally developed to store conveniently MRI data,
and then it has evolved to store pretty much any type of biomedical imaging data.
One convenient thing about this format is that it stores entire series in a single file,
so you don't have to have multiple files on the file system representing a 3D volume.
One aspect to remember is that NIfTI file format is actually
not generated by scanners unlike DICOM file format.
Therefore, in the metadata that comes with NifTI files,
you won't see you that variety of
different data elements as you will see in the DICOM file format.
Overall, NIfTI file format is quite widely used again in data science competition,
and NIfTI file formats sometimes can be
convenient when you are organizing Machine learning
pipelines and you want to optimize
your data and store it more conveniently in a single location.
Like the DICOM file format,
NIfTI file format stores metadata that helps you
understand what types of data you are looking at,
what are the pixel dimensions,
and other important attributes about your data.
Like DICOM file format,
NIfTI file format is published on the Web,
and below in this concepts,
we will post links to the NIfTI file format definition.
A few things to keep in mind,
a few important differences between DICOM and NIfTI file format,
one of them is that unlike DICOM file format,
the orientation information is stored differently in NIfTI.
So in DICOM, your x-values,
you have zero on the right side of the patient,
and x-values increase as you go to the left side of the patient,
and y in the DICOM file format.
So the values on the y-axis increase as you go towards the back of the patient.
NIfTI file format uses a different coordinate system,
so your x-values increase from left to right and
y values increase typically from back to the front,
something to keep in mind if you're converting from one to another.
NIfTI file format also stores pixel dimensions in a single data field.
As you might have guessed,
pixels or voxels in biomedical imaging,
and they don't have to be squares,
they can be rectangular.
One other distinction from DICOM is that all the measurements,
all the dimensions in DICOM are stored in millimeters,
whereas NIfTI stores information about the units of measurements,
and your distances and sizes in NIfTI can be in other units of measurement,
and that would be something important to check.
We will touch upon that later in exercises and the final projects.
A good thing about the NIfTI orientation axis is that the z-axis that goes from
the bottom of the patient to the top of the patient is
aligned the same way as it is in DICOM.
So this is it for the quick introduction into the NIfTI file format.
As I had mentioned, later in this course,
we will be loading NifTI files,
reading them, manipulating them.
So you will get a little bit more comfortable with NIfTI file format, hopefully.
In the next section, let us look at a few tools that will
help you load and visualize DICOM and NIfTI files.